MLSC FY22 Operating Grant

Organization Main Address
Organization Name: 
Address Line 1: 520 West Fayette Street
Address Line 2: 
City: Baltimore
State: MD
Zip Code: 21201

* Is the proposed project/program located at the same address as the organization address listed above?
Yes

* Are you a current MLSC grantee?
Yes

* Acknowledgement
X I certify that the information on our organization profile, including the board list and board chair contact information, is up-to-date.

* Client Eligibility Guidelines. Check all that apply
We certify that we use the current Maryland Legal Services Corporation income guidelines for client eligibility.
We use other guidelines in place of or in addition to the MLSC income guidelines.

* Project or Program Name

* Operating Grant Request
$236,800.00

Challenge Grant Request
$0

Total MLSC Grant Request
$236,800.00

* Project Director Name

* Project Director Phone

* Project Director Email

List your mission statement. (100 words)
PBRC engages and supports the Maryland legal community in meaningful and impactful volunteer service to ensure equal access to justice for those in need.

Provide a brief overview of the client and/or community needs your organization currently addresses. (500 words)
Community Needs
The Pro Bono Resource Center (PBRC) helps ensure equal access to justice in Maryland by supporting pro bono civil legal services as an integral part of an effective delivery system. By working with the legal services community, PBRC identifies and addresses the most critical unmet client and community needs. Our current in-house projects focus on consumer protection, home preservation, immigration, senior stability, and tenant advocacy where we supplement and expand, rather than duplicate legal services. These projects incorporate extensive volunteer service-learning through community or courthouse clinics, offering critical help to more than 2,000 clients in need. These projects also allow us to screen and triage case referrals where further representation is required.

Through our continued work to meet these community needs, PBRC provokes systemic change resulting in increased access to justice. Our Consumer Protection Project, for example, was formed in response to the actions of predatory lenders and unscrupulous debt buyers, as well as the complex and expedited court process of that docket. Our staff have built relationships with the judges and opposing counsel, leading to better negotiated settlements for our clients. Over the decade of the project’s operation, we have seen a significant reduction in abusive and predatory practices, and rarely see such actions from plaintiffs today. The same story is repeated in each of PBRC’s longstanding projects: abusive practices from mortgage lenders have dramatically declined; immigration judges seek out more pro bono services for their dockets; and fewer homeowners are at risk of tax sale.

Volunteer Needs
PBRC is the statewide coordinator of volunteer civil legal services, supplementing the staff legal services
programs. As the Maryland State Bar Association’s (MSBA) “pro bono arm,” we recruit, train, and mentor volunteer lawyers, integrating them into the statewide legal services system. These volunteers help providers address vital legal needs and fill in service gaps due to case restrictions or limited resources. We support volunteers with extensive mentoring through a Professional Skills Academy, roundtables, assigned mentors, listservs, malpractice insurance, the MLSC Litigation Fund, and extensive substantive legal training. PBRC is responsible for developing and promoting pro bono policies for the state and raising awareness of the need for volunteer legal services. We also staff the Court of Appeals’ Standing Committee on Pro Bono Legal Services and work with local pro bono committees.

Provider Needs
PBRC is the only technical assistance and resource center for legal services providers, bringing them together around access to justice issues and offering advice, training, and networking. This work is invaluable to maintaining an efficient, coordinated and streamlined delivery system and has become increasingly critical as the legal services community adapts to COVID-19 restrictions. Activities to bolster quality of and capacity for the providers include managing the Pro Bono Coordinating Council, hosting the Partners for Justice Conference, offering site visits and consultations, promoting multiple pro bono efforts, and training staff. We spend significant time supporting smaller providers, as well as immigration legal services organizations. 

Check below ALL categories of service that your organization currently provides.
Civil legal services for low‐income people (for example, direct legal representation, coordination with private attorneys, legal education, research, pro se training, etc.)
Legal training and/or technical assistance for other providers of civil legal services for low‐income people, and other activities necessary to ensure the delivery of quality legal services
Services other than the above (ex. health services, counseling, food for homeless people, criminal legal representation, etc.)

How often does your board of directors meet?
PBRC’s board of directors meets six times per year.

Describe how members of your board are selected. (150 words)
The Maryland State Bar Association (MSBA) requires the Board positions to be advertised in legal publications and allows PBRC to submit names of potential Board members to their Appointments Committee. The MSBA Appointments Committee interviews the candidates and makes recommendations to the MSBA Board of Governors. There were several open positions this year and the Appointments Committee made its recommendations to the MSBA Board of Governors for approval after conducting a search. If there is a mid-term vacancy, we can typically forward the recommendation directly to the Board of Governors.

Do you have 100% board participation in fundraising? 
Yes
No

If you have a give-or-get policy, briefly describe it.
All Board members are required to sign the Give and Get Policy which includes a personal contribution as well as a fundraising goal. A few board members are in government service or on the board by virtue of their positions elsewhere (such as in the MSBA or with a legal services program), which allows them to donate but limits their ability to fundraise.

Describe the current civil legal services you provide to low-income people and related activities. Indicate who (staff attorneys, paralegals, pro bono volunteers, etc.) performs the work (ex. staff attorneys represent clients, pro bono attorneys volunteer at clinics, etc.). (1,500 words)
PBRC provides direct service to low-income individuals through our projects, addressing emerging areas of critical legal need. By taking the lead in developing these projects in partnership with other providers, community organizations, and the courts, our efforts have enhanced the capacity of providers to reach additional clients and ensures a streamlined and comprehensive approach to services. PBRC takes its role as coordinator seriously, consistently thinking through how our work can extend new areas of service and ensure that we are not replicating or duplicating existing services. In fact, the project work serves as an effective mechanism to identify gaps and injustices in the system that we can address collectively—in addition to reaching pro se litigants and underserved populations. Just as importantly, through these projects we have built tremendous capacity within the legal services community and the bar to amplify their work. 

Our primary focus is on coordinating legal advice clinics in courthouses and low-income communities, providing immediate help, as well as “triage” for those needing extended assistance. We work with partners to provide additional wraparound services at clinics, such as intake with partner programs for continuing legal help or assistance with another identified legal issue, benefits screenings, small loans, or housing retrofits and improvements. Thousands of clients receive valuable legal advice through these projects and, if necessary, are referred to volunteers or other programs directly for full representation so no client falls through the cracks. In some instances, such as estate planning, all the documents necessary for full representation are completed at the clinic, allowing for expedited legal assistance and preventing the clients from having to go from one legal provider to another, losing valuable time and resources.   
PBRC’s current projects include: Home Preservation Project (HPP), Maryland Immigrant Legal Assistance Project (MILAP), and Courtroom Advocacy Project (CAP), which is comprised of the Consumer Protection Project (CPP) and Tenant Volunteer Lawyer of the Day Program (TVLD) and described in further detail below. Each evolved organically out of our close work with the court system, other nonprofits, and community organizations. Each project continues to evolve based on evidence from evaluations (client, court, or other stakeholder input) and experience. 

HPP deploys pro bono attorneys to help low-income families and seniors at risk of losing their homes. The program uses a broad range of strategic interventions, including tax sale prevention clinics, utility bill clinics, and estate planning. The Project Director and staff attorney train and manage the volunteers and provide extensive mentoring to volunteers staffing the legal clinics. The project coordinator assists with client outreach, research and data collection and clinic administration. Volunteer notaries also help with the estate planning clinics so the clients can leave with a fully executed will, financial power of attorney and/or advanced medical directive in one consultation. During the pandemic, HPP volunteers are offering advance planning via remote consultations.

MILAP volunteers and PBRC’s Project Director, part-time attorney, and bilingual paralegal typically appear in Baltimore City’s federal Immigration Court two days a week, helping immigrant children, families, and adults understand the court process and guiding them toward resources for full representation or assisting with pro se paperwork assistance, such as asylum applications. Currently, MILAP volunteers are offering remote consultations via WhatsApp and GoogleVoice lines. The project has a special focus on unaccompanied immigrant children and coordinates the joint efforts and volunteer training needs of the many immigration legal services providers and nonprofits to assist the immigrant population in Maryland. 

CPP provides assistance to struggling families who have been sued by creditors on the affidavit judgment docket. Managed by the CAP Project Director, pro bono lawyers and the staff attorneys in CPP help consumers assert defenses in court, negotiate settlement agreements with creditors, and represent consumers in litigation with the assistance of a paralegal. When courts are open, PBRC is the only program at District Court in Baltimore City on Wednesdays (MVLS covers Tuesdays), and the only legal services program at all in Prince George’s County. Currently, PBRC staff and volunteers are offering our services through a remote docket in Prince George’s County. The pro bono lawyers work with plaintiffs’ counsel to negotiate settlements under the mentorship of the staff attorney. The paralegal assists with client intake and coordination, data collection and research, and court navigation.

TVLD places volunteer attorneys in Baltimore City Rent Court to defend tenants being sued for nonpayment of rent, while MLSC-funded extended representation work enables us to provide tenants with assistance for postponements, Tenant Holding Over, Breach of Lease, and rent escrow proceedings. The project is managed by the CAP Project Director who, along with the staff attorneys, serves as a mentor, supports the volunteers, and handles cases when volunteers are unavailable. A project paralegal also assists. Hundreds of litigants are screened and triaged through the coordinated efforts of PBRC. With an advocate, tenants almost always prevail or secure a favorable outcome, such as safer housing, stopping evictions, and/or negotiating lower rental costs. During the pandemic, staff attorneys are present in court, when open, while volunteer attorneys have the option of participating in person or remotely. CAP staff are also operating a tenant and consumer hotline during the pandemic to conduct triage, provide information and referrals, and offer representation where possible.

Over the past two years, PBRC helped 13,553 low-income individuals. We trained 1,938 individuals and our clients saved or avoided costs totaling $1,934,856—in addition to receiving $1,060,087 in donated legal help. These services are not only impressive by sheer numbers and outcomes but have helped reduce the burden on other legal services providers and the courts, allowing them to focus on more long-term and intractable cases. Enabling this spectrum of service delivery without duplicating any services already in place leverages our resources and makes the entire system work more efficiently.

List the jurisdiction(s) (counties, cities, neighborhoods, etc.) served by your legal services program. (150 words)
All of Maryland. PBRC offers training, mentoring, and support services statewide, and serves each county’s pro bono committee (required by court rule). Volunteers may be referred to any pro bono or legal services program in Maryland. All training opportunities, consultations, technical assistance, and support are offered statewide, using technology to extend these supports to any jurisdiction. PBRC’s direct legal services are mainly focused on Baltimore City and Prince George’s County, but we serve clients living throughout the state in our Maryland Immigrant Legal Assistance Project, as all Maryland immigration cases currently come through one federal court, located in Baltimore City.

Describe the primary client population served by your legal services program (ex. general low‐income population, homeless persons, victims of domestic violence, etc.). (250 words)
PBRC focuses on serving low-income populations who do not have access to legal counsel. We publicize all MLSC funded-legal services programs, including those serving the homeless, veterans, consumer defendants, the disabled, families in conflict, the elderly, at risk youth, ex-offenders needing record expungements, immigrants, community groups, and more. PBRC then responds with volunteers who will help address the legal needs of the providers’ clients.

PBRC learns of populations needing special attention through routine outreach with legal services providers and the courts, as well as our tenant and consumer hotline. We conduct annual surveys at the Partners for Justice Conference and feedback also comes from meeting with local pro bono committees and providers. Our clinics also provide a lens to the other legal needs of low-income individuals as our clients frequently seek direction and referral on matters beyond the scope of the clinic they attend. We respond to this need by equipping all clinic staff with the tools for making effective referrals, and, in some cases, partner providers attend clinics to conduct intake for further assistance or issues beyond the scope of the instant clinic. Occasionally, we determine a critical new client population through public or state recognition of an enormous need, such as in the foreclosure crisis or the waves of unaccompanied children. PBRC has similarly created innovative projects to address the legal needs of seniors, families in conflict, consumers plagued by debt buyers, veterans needing benefits, and tenants facing eviction.

If your program charges income‐eligible clients for services, please describe in detail (ex. "$25 application
fee" or "$25 per hour").
N/A

How are potential clients made aware of the availability of proposed services? (250 words)
PBRC recently published a Client Services flyer that lists the direct legal services offered and the number for PBRC’s consumer and tenant hotline. Staff are also giving virtual presentations to schools, libraries, community organizations etc. PBRC occasionally prints and distributes Maryland Lawyers Care brochures (legal services directories) in each county of the state to inform the public about the legal services available as needed. We also promote joint ventures, such as the Pro Bono Days and legal fairs sponsored by various providers and the Young Lawyers. PBRC regularly conducts public outreach related to our direct service projects and the multiple clinics we staff and host in the community. For instance, for tax sale work, we send postcards to all the several thousands of affected homes to invite them to receive our legal assistance. We also offer a website (taxsalehelpbaltimore.org) for those needing to know about the tax sale process and resources. We work closely with our hosting organizations for our community clinics in churches, senior centers, multi-cultural centers etc. to share information about our services through flyers, email postings and general announcements. Our courthouse clinics are advertised on-site to litigants through signage, our presence (with name badges), and making multiple courtroom announcements during the relevant dockets. During the pandemic, PBRC has stepped up our outreach efforts. This includes paid advertising on Facebook, dropping off fliers at food banks and other community sites, sharing information about our services with new partners, and providing remote “Know Your Rights” presentations to community groups.

Describe briefly any special efforts your program makes to accommodate clients having the following needs:
Primary language other than English
Our Maryland Immigrant Legal Assistance Project Director is proficient in Spanish and our MILAP paralegal is a native Spanish speaker. They continue to do a superb job recruiting volunteer interpreters for our immigration work. Our paralegal also translates forms into Spanish and communicates directly with clients in all our projects, as needed, including making follow-up calls in Spanish to ensure that each client is connected with a lawyer. Spanish intake forms are available for tax sale prevention clinics and the Consumer Protection Project. PBRC utilizes the Language Line at clinics and has periodically relied on this service at in-court Consumer Protection Project clinics, especially in Prince George’s County. We utilize in-court translators for our Rent Court services.

Physical, developmental, intellectual or other disabilities
PBRC will offer special accommodations when requested. Most services are offered via telephone or by the volunteers at community or courthouse clinics, where accommodations are available. We offer TTY
services as well.

Lacking transportation to your service location(s)
PBRC is not established to provide direct client service from our office and our service locations are the courthouse or community sites which can be readily accessed. We do provide extensive information and referrals for prospective clients over the telephone, by email, or mail; during the COVID-19 pandemic we are providing consultations via these methods as well. 

Institutionalized or incarcerated clients
PBRC offers TTY access, accepts phone calls from prisoners and other institutions, and responds regularly
to letters from those incarcerated.

Other needs particularly applicable to your client population
Project Household, part of the Home Preservation Project, focuses on seniors who sometimes require special assistance due to disabilities or limited literacy. Program services are offered in the community to reduce the transportation obstacles and those needing special accommodations are helped separately.

Describe your intake process. For example, where do clients come to apply for services, how are their needs diagnosed, and what staff/volunteers are involved in intake? (500 words)
Under normal operations, clients are directed to contact the office by phone to preregister for utility bill assistance, tax sale prevention, as well as estate planning. As noted above, outreach to potential clients includes publicity through elected officials, community groups, media, and postcard mailings. Clients asked to pre-register are given instructions about the paperwork they need to bring to the clinic and speak to a staff member to complete the initial intake process and ask questions. During COVID-operations, intake is conducted over the phone or via an online form, depending on the technological capabilities of the client, for the Home Preservation and Maryland Immigrant Legal Assistance projects. Staff inform the client of what documentation they will need for their consult, and mail or email materials so the client can follow along during the remote service. Anyone who attends a an in-person clinic or a remote appointment is provided service, including free one-on-one legal counsel and a completed “roadmap” for their next steps. 

In the Courtroom Advocacy Project, pro se litigants appearing in district court are offered the opportunity to meet with a pro bono lawyer through a court announcement. Once they agree to receive legal services, they complete an intake form and meet with counsel. This also applies to services provided through the remote consumer docket in Prince George’s County. Similarly, immigrants have the opportunity to meet with a pro bono attorney during regular clinic days at Baltimore Immigration Court when court is in session, or by preregistering to attend periodic out-of-court clinics. We also promote marylandfreelegalanswers.org via postcard mailings, word of mouth, and social media so people who cannot leave their home can access a pro bono lawyer online assuming they pass the simple eligibility criteria. 

Pro bono lawyers diagnose legal issues and what is required after a one-on-one in-person consult. They will not refuse to proffer advice but will refer clients to varying resources depending on their situation. The pro bono lawyers provide the direct legal advice as well as brief intake and screening at times with help from experienced mentors, including PBRC’s staff. Non-lawyers also help coordinate and staff the events and assist clients with paperwork and screening. The project coordinators and paralegals are the primary contact for clients who wish to attend a legal clinic, informing clients over the phone or via email about materials needed at their clinic consultation or any necessary follow-up.

How do you handle denials of service?
Denials are not made unless there are no attorneys available (which has not occurred in any of our clinics).

Describe the steps your program takes to attract and retain highly qualified staff (500 words)
Staff are typically hired through advertising in the newspaper, online, and through free or discounted vocational and placement services. PBRC also reaches out to colleagues, board members, and staff within the community to see if qualified people are available. Staff members are carefully screened and interviewed, and references are checked. Employees have a three-month probationary period. After their three-month evaluation, employees are formally evaluated once a year but, given the small nature of the office, the Executive Director and Deputy Director address concerns on an as-needed basis. Staff are evaluated annually and given an opportunity to express concerns, make recommendations and discuss their growth in the organization. Again, given the relatively small size of the office, staff are frequently invited to suggest improvements, take on new responsibilities and help select other team members to keep them feeling engaged and valued.

Provide brief job descriptions (not resumes), including qualifications, for the following staff members. If you previously submitted job descriptions and they have not changed, indicate so below.

Case handlers (attorneys and paralegals)
Job descriptions for case handlers have not changed.

Case supervisors (ex. managing attorney)
Job descriptions for case supervisors have not changed.

Briefly describe provisions for assuring the quality of services delivered by your organization. "Case and/or work assignment" includes such activities as staff meetings to decide who will handle certain cases, assignment by managing attorneys, etc.

Methods for case and/or work assignment (150 words)
PBRC holds weekly staff meetings to review current activities and brainstorm strategies and approaches. This often includes assignments of duties and event staffing. Supervisors check in regularly with staff to ensure tasks are being handled and to troubleshoot any issues; each project specific “team” meets regularly to review cases, address new issues, and coordinate assignments.

While volunteers typically handle cases at clinics, Project Directors periodically make decisions on-site as to whether cases need to be handled by in-house staff to address client volume, case complexity, or another issue. At all CAP clinics, the Director encourages present volunteers to take unresolved cases on a pro bono basis, and warm referrals to other providers are made as appropriate. The CAP Director and staff attorneys handle all CPP in-house cases (typically to finalize a settlement or secure a hardship dismissal) and share coverage of escrow and postponed cases not accepted by volunteers.

Procedures for reviewing/supervising work
Supervisors regularly receive status reports from the staff on their various work activities and hold recurring meetings. In a small office, interaction among staff is common and most people are aware of any issues or gaps in service that need to be filled. Evaluations and staff meetings help ensure high quality work productivity. Those cases referred to volunteers in CAP are reviewed by the Project Director. If the volunteer has any questions, he/she can contact the Project Director for direction. In addition, volunteers are provided with experienced mentors and, in MILAP, can utilize an interactive listserv for guidance from other members of the bar who practice in this area. Disposition forms are used for each case; and, as appropriate, PBRC staff researches the results of cases online through use of Maryland Judiciary Case Search.

Provisions for backup and technical support for paralegals, volunteers, law students and other non‐attorneys involved in legal service delivery
Our attorney and non-attorney volunteers receive an orientation from the Project Director, who also supervises them. Depending on the project, experienced mentors or law school clinical faculty may also be present for more advanced questions or guidance.

Methods for determining client satisfaction
PBRC uses exit surveys in its project clinics and court consultations to gauge client satisfaction which are consistently high. We also collect satisfaction surveys from our attorney training seminars and collaborative forums or conferences with providers and use them for future planning.

Describe other significant quality control methods not covered above (150 words)
We have instituted procedures for intake, rejection, referral, collecting outcome measurements, and client satisfaction, and transfer lessons learned to all projects to ensure a high quality, consistent and streamlined process. As a rule, we incorporate a mentoring component into each of our projects, so volunteers have experts to consult. We similarly offer periodic roundtables with experts to answer questions for volunteers and share new knowledge and information.

Quality control of volunteers we refer to other providers is typically more challenging. We have addressed this issue by sponsoring ongoing training sessions, “Lunch and Learn” sessions for any MLSC program volunteer and repeat reviews of the sessions via webcast for existing volunteers. We also launched a new Professional Skills Academy in August 2019, in which each Fellow receives a mentor. The program was wildly successful, and a second cohort of Fellows is currently engaged in the program. 

Provide an overview of administrative and clerical support. Indicate any special resources that are available for enhancing efficiency or quality.
Each staff member has access to a computer, including a laptop during remote work, and handles the majority of his/her own correspondence and administrative work. A full-time executive assistant/office manager assists with bookkeeping, board meetings, executive director support, general operations, attorney reporting, and administrative tasks. Four project coordinators/paralegals split responsibility for the in-house projects, assisting with outreach, client follow-up, logistics, training registration, data entry, clinic preparation, reporting, and management of the Litigation Fund. 

Briefly describe the process by which your organization assesses community needs and sets priorities for allocating program resources to address them. (250 words)
PBRC is in year two of implementing our strategic plan, which defines our goals and priorities for the next three years. We rely on the legal services providers, MLSC, and our experiences in our direct service programs to assess and prioritize client and community needs. We then identify individual attorneys or groups of attorneys who are best suited to address those needs. We allocate resources according to the requests for assistance we receive and our sense of where PBRC can be most effective. Program priorities are similarly determined by contact with the legal services community and the Pro Bono Coordinating Council, as well as requests received by our office and from all the projects’ client exit surveys. 

Meetings with local pro bono committees and an annual survey of providers at the Partners for Justice Conference are both useful in identifying needs and priorities. Occasionally, urgent needs are brought to us by government agencies or the courts and we engage in an assessment process to determine the priority and our capacity to make a difference. 

Specify how regular input is obtained from the low‐income population and other interested parties in your service area.
PBRC staff speak daily to members of the public seeking legal assistance, as well as to those involved in serving low-income individuals. We have extensive contact with those in need through our direct service projects, including our new tenant and consumer hotline. We also periodically conduct surveys of legal services providers to help determine where resources should be focused. PBRC benefits from discussions at Board meetings and invitations to legal services providers to share their priorities. The local pro bono committee meetings organized by PBRC on behalf of the Court of Appeals’ Standing Committee on Pro Bono Legal Service also provide good insight into needs of the local populations. PBRC Project Directors are also actively involved in either groups like the Attorney General’s COVID Task Force, other legal aid or other community task forces, and working groups around issues impacting low-income clients.

When were your priorities last updated? Month/Year, if available
08/2019

What are your current top legal service priorities? List up to five (Example: consumer law, protective orders, foreclosures, etc.). Please include LEGAL SERVICE AREAS only in this section, not other organizational priorities (Example: do not list “securing more funding”).

First Priority
Assisting greater numbers of low-income individuals by building pro bono capacity in Maryland through the recruitment, training, and engagement of volunteers.

Second Priority
Assisting legal services providers through the recruitment, training, and referral of volunteers to support their programs.

Third Priority
Developing innovative pro bono initiatives, policies, and service models to engage volunteers and directly impact areas of emerging or underserved need, aimed at economic stability.

Fourth Priority
Housing and economic stability (eviction prevention, consumer law, foreclosure prevention, utility bill assistance, and estate planning).

Fifth Priority
Immigration

What case management system do you use?
Other; JusticeServer, built on the Salesforce platform

Do you use an online client intake system? If so, please specify. Does it integrate automatically with your case management system?
All projects are completing intakes remotely, depending on their individual technology access and capabilities: via phone, mail/email, or online. For online intakes, clients submit their form via FormAssembly, after which paralegals receive notification and create the record in the case management database. The process is not automatically integrated. 

What fundraising/grant management software do you use, if any?
PBRC uses Salesforce, which features fundraising and grant management capabilities.

Describe the methods you use to back up case files and other data.
All information in the database is backed up daily and stored electronically in a remote location, as is any documentation in SharePoint (our cloud-based network) or FormAssembly (online intake forms). Client files from in-person clinic events and intakes are kept within the office and not shared with any outside agencies except to the extent that clinic forms (e.g., client disclosure/disclaimer agreements) permit PBRC to share client forms with partner programs so that clients may receive additional case assistance following a PBRC clinic. If hard-copy clients files are generated during remote work, project staff periodically bring them to the office for storage. 

Describe any plans to upgrade technology (computers, operating systems, software, etc.). Have you had any challenges due to hardware or software being out‐of‐date? (150 words)
PBRC is halfway through our move to a cloud-based network, with a smaller on-site technology presence. The pandemic accelerated our move to remote computing. Depending on funding, in FY22, PBRC hopes to hire a consultant to finalize and more fully secure our Windows and data infrastructure and update the smaller physical network in the office in preparation for regathering. We will also upgrade printing and scanning capabilities at our community and court clinics.

We plan to replace our VOIP phone system with a solution that will fully support remote and on-site needs, at a predictable and more affordable price. PBRC also plans to improve our web, Salesforce, and SharePoint software, to make our processes more reliable and efficient. With additional consulting hours and integrated software tools, we will improve how we communicate with volunteers and clients, and how we manage the data generated by our work.

Check all programs or projects that include private attorney involvement:
Client Services consist of direct legal representation of eligible clients by a private attorney or participation in other client service programs, for example, providing legal education or pro se training. Support Services include legal training and/or technical assistance provided by a private attorney to other practitioners who represent eligible clients.
Pro Bono Client or Support Services
Compensated Client or Support Services
Other methods of private attorney involvement
None

Describe pro bono private attorney involvement. Include a description of how legal work is evaluated and how pro bono cases are tracked. (500 words)
The hundreds of volunteers recruited and trained through PBRC are typically referred to other legal services providers to offer direct representation, brief advice and counsel, clinic work, legal education, or some other type of legal service. Each provider uses their own method of evaluation and tracking. 

Client services offered by volunteers through PBRC legal clinics in court, community, or remote settings are supervised by the project directors or staff attorneys on-site and/or through experienced mentors (usually both are present). That model is employed with consumer protection, foreclosure and tax sale prevention, immigration, landlord-tenant, estate planning, and utility bill services. Additionally, for consumer protection and rent court we also refer cases to volunteers who are subject to disposition reports and with whom project directors or staff attorneys provide case support as needed. Each project offers the volunteers outside mentors as well to ensure quality control.

Describe compensated private attorney involvement. Include a description of how legal work is evaluated and how compensated cases are tracked. (250 words)
Under our MLSC Extended Representation grant, we place a small volume of low bono rent escrow cases with volunteer attorneys who participate in clinics through our Tenant Volunteer Lawyer of the Day Program.  When available, low bono cases are advertised to eligible volunteers for acceptance. As a condition of accepting the case, volunteers must keep PBRC apprised of their progress and, in order to be paid for their low-bono time, must complete a case closure form online. We track placed cases in both an Excel spreadsheet log and in our Salesforce database.   

Describe other private attorney involvement. (250 words)
PBRC includes volunteer attorneys in its substantive legal training classes (along with pro bono coordinators and staff attorneys). We recruit and train hundreds of pro bono lawyers for general pro bono work who are referred to other MLSC grantees and engage some in our collaborative projects.  These trainings are almost always conducted in conjunction with a legal services partner or the MSBA Continuing Legal Education department. Mentors are engaged to respond to questions and provide technical assistance, consult with volunteers, and offer support, as well as serving in the Professional Skills Academy. PBRC also manages the Litigation Fund for MLSC grantees’ pro bono and Judicare attorneys, typically processing over 200 requests for reimbursement statewide. 

Pro bono lawyers participate as panelists at our Partners for Justice Conference. They help manage and coordinate pro bono projects or place pro bono cases with other lawyers and respond to legal questions online via marylandfreelegalanswers.org. Volunteer board members and others make public presentations about the value of pro bono work, engage in pro bono service, become involved in advocacy, and participate in the statewide and local planning and implementation of recommendations to improve the legal services delivery system through local and Standing Committee work. They are occasionally requested to assist with sessions at the MSBA Annual Meeting, funder meetings, presentations to local bars or committees, and in community education.

Briefly describe the most significant ways in which your program actively works with other organizations (ex. other legal services providers, community-based organizations, etc.). Include collaborations such as joint projects, working with coalitions, etc. Especially mention collaboration with other MLSC grantees. Do not list organizations to whom you simply refer clients, unless you have a specific, established referral relationship. (750 words)
PBRC makes a special effort to work closely with other legal services providers and support their programs. We consider it a success if we can facilitate activities and resources that strengthen and expand the scope of providers, enabling them to handle more clients in an efficient, meaningful, and coordinated way. Our recruitment and training programs direct hundreds of potential volunteers to the network of MLSC legal services agencies. In addition to numerous joint training seminars, we manage the MSBA and MAJ CLE programs for pro bono and staff legal services lawyers. PBRC promotes the provider organizations at various bar outreach events, recognizes their efforts, and identifies resources for their benefit. We also manage the MLSC Litigation Fund for reduced fee, Judicare and pro bono cases, working directly with the volunteer attorneys, substantially reducing the time the providers need to devote to those reimbursements.

Shortly after the start of the pandemic, PBRC spearheaded two statewide legal services remote technology roundtables to facilitate group sharing about solutions. We invited ethics and technology experts as well as staff attorneys and shared solutions to help us provide services to clients. Additionally, we had informal discussions with other providers about technologies such as Microsoft Teams and SharePoint, which were increasingly adopted as organizations worked remotely. We documented and shared some of the insights PBRC gained at via social media (https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/ten-things-think-when-moving-your-org-from-windows-file-dave-pantzer/). We further discussed with providers the technology issues relating to both homebound staff and homebound clients and documented a set of needs and recommendations at: https://probonomd.org/proceeding-remotely/. Similarly, we worked on the Data and Legal Technology committee of the Attorney General’s COVID-19 Access to Justice Task Force and remain involved in the ongoing work of that committee. Currently, we are working with Margaret Henn of MVLS on a presentation for the 2021 MSBA Annual Meeting on the topic of “Clouds and Silver Linings: Practical Considerations for Moving your Files to SharePoint Online.”

To further enhance cooperation and efficiency within the legal services community, PBRC creates
innovative projects with a particular issue focus based on areas of identified unmet or underserved need. Each project developed out of a request for us to become involved as the coordinator and deliver high quality legal assistance through the best mechanism possible. That meant conducting evidence-based research and determining the extent and scope of the need, ensuring that we were not duplicating services, seeking partners to leverage resources and offer a continuum of services wherever feasible. PBRC typically played the role of designing and setting up a model delivery mechanism, such as a courthouse or community clinic, and then worked with the courts or host agencies to conduct outreach, client intake and screening methods, recruited and trained volunteers, offered mentoring support, and conducted evaluations and outcome measurements to determine the level of impact. These projects have significantly benefited the legal services partners insofar as they offer them new volunteers, screen clients for intake and give them “warm” referrals and allow them to focus resources on more extended representation. PBRC’s projects have also brought new foundation and government dollars to our legal services partners as a result—dollars that they may not have had otherwise. 

Our partnerships with the programs vary in scope, depending on respective needs and capacity.  These include, among others: the Consumer Protection Project with MVLS; Project Household with Legal Aid, MVLS, Senior Legal Services; Maryland Immigrant Legal Assistance Project which is the only legal services program with a regular presence in immigration court, and thus serves to triage and refer potential cases to the various immigration providers, such as Ayuda, Catholic Charities of Baltimore and DC, Tahirih Justice Center, the University of Maryland Carey School of Law Immigration Clinic, KIND, CASA de Maryland, HIAS, and Capital Area Immigrants’ Rights (CAIR) Coalition as well as pro bono providers who handle the family law portion of SIJS cases (MVLS, CLS, MCBF, MSPB, etc.). In TVLD, we coordinate resources and referrals with the Self-Help Center operated by Legal Aid and staff rent court alongside PJC and HPRP. 

PBRC additionally collaborates with the Access to Justice Commission, MD Legal Services Executives, and
People’s Law Library. We staff the Standing Committee on Pro Bono Legal Service and work with local pro
bono committees statewide, traveling across Maryland to discuss how to identify community legal needs
and locally garner legal resources to best address them.

Describe any ways in which your program involves volunteers other than attorneys (for example, paralegals, lay advocates, law students) in the delivery of legal services, and how appropriate attorney supervision is provided. (300 words)
The Maryland Immigrant Legal Assistance Project typically engages over 30 volunteer interpreters annually who appear for courthouse and community clinics, and pro bono paralegals, college and law students. We also have one volunteer who attends clinic regularly and periodically helps with client calls from the office in Spanish. In the Consumer Protection Project and Tenant Volunteer Lawyer of the Day Program, law students enrolled in clinics have assisted in court consultations in the city’s district court and volunteer navigators have been a useful resource. In our Home Preservation Project, PBRC engages volunteer notaries as well. Volunteer panelists work on the Partners for Justice conference planning and presentations, a number of whom are not attorneys but come from a variety of social services and advocacy organizations.

Current Expenses
(see chart on portal)

Current Funding
(see chart on portal)

Current Breakdown of Select Categories
(see chart on portal)

Current In-Kind Resources
(see chart on portal)

* Describe any major changes to your expenditures and/or sources of revenue, as well as any programmatic implications of those changes, from last year’s application. (Example: “In last year’s application we anticipated an increase in our grant from XYZ State Agency. That increase did not occur, so we were not able to hire an additional staff person.”) (500 words)
The Maryland State Bar Association has eliminated funding for PBRC. MSBA dollars were unrestricted and used to support operating expenses like occupancy and salaries for support staff (marketing, training, and administrative), significantly impacting our core services of recruiting, training, and referring pro bono lawyers and providing technical assistance to MLSC grantees. We also anticipate reduced income from the Partners for Justice Conference (which subsidized attendance), no United Way funding for general work ($30,000), and a decline in corporate giving as a number of firms indicated that they had cut their philanthropic budgets. This year saw a one-time funding opportunity for Covid-19 related technology and services to help transition to remote work (a combination of state and private funding). It enabled us to purchase PPE and related safety equipment for our staff, and to have each employee work effectively from home with laptops and other miscellaneous equipment (e.g. printers etc.).  We also received a new two-year grant for eviction defense work from Wells Fargo. This means that it is challenging to maintain the recruitment, marketing and training for volunteers and staff, and will be understaffed for our home preservation work, but can step in for additional eviction defense work.  As for expenses, we saw a marked reduction in travel and food costs and experienced a large staff turnover which impacted our personnel costs. Commitment 

How much money do you have in reserve (usually unrestricted net assets)? Do you have a reserve policy? If so, briefly describe it.
Assets without donor restrictions are estimated to be $1,289,000; approximately 73% of the operating budget. Our auditors recommend that we have at least 75-100% of our operating budget in unrestricted net assets.

Additions to Current Programming. If you are proposing to add legal services programs or address additional needs not identified in the Legal Services Program section, describe them here. (750 words)
During the court closures of the COVID-19 pandemic, PBRC’s Courtroom Advocacy Project initiated a new tenant and consumer hotline (“CAP Hotline”), and we anticipate continuing this service during FY22. Although originally designed for Baltimore City tenants being sued by their landlords and consumers being sued under affidavit in either Baltimore City and Prince George’s County – the populations served by CAP’s Tenant Volunteer Lawyer of the Day Program (TVLD Program) and Consumer Protection Project (CPP), respectively – we have received calls from across the state. CAP staff attorneys are assigned to cover the hotline during regular business hours, Monday through Friday. When callers inquire about cases that are within the scope of the TVLD Program or CPP and they are interested in receiving legal assistance, we will initiate a remote intake process and, if needed, request court files to confirm eligibility. For callers that are outside of the scope of CAP, staff attorneys will provide legal information about their situation and referrals to appropriate legal services providers or other resources such as rental assistance. 

Since the pandemic began, we observed an uptick in tenants calling about Tenant Holding Over cases (THOs), Breach of Lease cases (BOLs), and threats of or illegal evictions. As Baltimore City landlords have been stymied from using their preferred route to eviction – suing their tenant for failure to pay rent in district court – due to court closures and, when open, small, very backlogged dockets, they have looked to other mechanisms for pursuing back rent and eviction, even illegal self-help. CAP has responded by periodically handling these case types for CAP Hotline callers or when a referral is received from a rent court partner, thus expanding the kinds of tenant matters for which we can provide assistance. Although covering the failure to pay rent dockets to provide day-of-court representation to pro se tenants and offering extended representation on postponed FTPR cases and escrow proceedings will remain our central focus, we do anticipate continuing to provide representation on THOs, BOLs, and illegal eviction cases if resources allow. 

Finally, PBRC is taking advantage of the new possibilities in remote service to engage pro bono attorneys in all corners of the state. We are starting new quarterly newsletters with statewide information for Local Pro Bono Committees to help them with sharing relevant content with their members and local bars. These will include volunteer profiles, information about pro bono service opportunities and trainings, award nomination solicitations, and other relevant news. The newsletters will also be sent to leaders of local and specialty bar associations.

* Use for the Requested Funds. Describe the specific purposes for which the requested funds will be used (ex. "The requested funds will cover salaries and support costs for 1.5 full‐time equivalent paralegals."). (250 words)
The requested funds will cover salaries and support costs for 1.8 FTE attorneys and 0.8 FTE other staff, in addition to items such as occupancy, office supplies, insurance, and contract services.

Prohibited Activities
Check to indicate any MLSC‐prohibited activities that are performed by your organization.
None

Special Features. Are you proposing to use MLSC funds for a specific project or program that differs from or has a more specialized focus than your overall legal services program as described in prior sections?
No

Proposed Expenses
(see chart on portal)

Did you request MLSC funds for capital additions?
(if yes, “provide a brief explanation” 150 words)
No

Did you request MLSC funds for contract services?
(if yes, “provide a brief explanation” 150 words)
Yes

Provide a brief explanation of the contract services request.
These include computer maintenance and IT services, database updates for Salesforce, technology training, and a nominal amount of website and social media services.

Did you request MLSC funds in the “other” line item (last line of non-personnel section)?
(if yes, “provide a brief explanation” 150 words)
Yes

Provide a brief explanation of the "other" line item request (last line of non-personnel section).
These will cover board expenses, bank fees, equipment repairs, clinic costs and outreach activities.

Provide any explanations or notes you feel would help MLSC evaluate your budget request. (150 words)
PBRC continues to evolve and has successfully leveraged resources to offer quality services while meeting a wide array of constituencies’ needs. This is even more apparent during the pandemic, as we pivoted quickly to continue serving both clients and MLSC grantees. MLSC funding enables us to maximize that leverage but as we scale to assist more programs and create greater partnerships in the community costs continue to rise. Certain hard costs, such as software, which we were able to use for lengthy periods of time after a single purchase, are now only being offered through annual subscriptions, raising our training, communications, and operational costs even further. Finally, as PBRC continues to aid other programs and serves one of the largest groups of pro bono clients statewide, its financial support is critical to maintain that level of service and continue to bring partner agencies new initiatives and resources.

If additional funds are made available for MLSC challenge grants, above the level funding request, PBRC would welcome the opportunity to request additional funds through a challenge grant.

Proposed Funding
(see chart on portal)

Proposed Breakdown of Select Categories
(see chart on portal)

Proposed In-Kind Resources
(see chart on portal)	

Sources of Funding Notes
If you anticipate any significant changes in sources of funding, please explain (ex. “FY18 grant from XYZ Foundation was for one year only and is not eligible for renewal in FY19” or “Special event revenue will decrease in FY19 due to an anniversary gala in FY18”). (250 words)
The MSBA has completely cut PBRC’s funding for FY21 and we anticipate we will no longer receive funding from them in the foreseeable future. This is a critical loss of operating dollars. We anticipate no further funding from Department of Housing and Community Development. The Stulman Foundation has advised us of reduced funding for Project Household moving forward, leaving a gap of at least $160,000 to support our work with Baltimore City seniors. We also anticipate lower corporate revenues in FY22 given the uncertainty in the economy and our inability to hold a fundraising gala and secure sponsorships. All of these cuts will put further strain on staff and other resources. 

Proposed Increase or Change from Current Year Funding
If you are requesting a funding increase or propose to significantly change the use of MLSC funds from your current year's MLSC grant (ex. staffing, services provided, etc.), highlight what those changes will be or how increased funds will be used. (500 words)
N/A

Projected Cases
(see chart on portal)

If Other Appropriate Remedies exceeds 10% of the total, provide a breakdown.
N/A

If the increase or decrease in projected closed cases is greater than 10% AND 20 cases from last year's grant application, please explain (ex. “20% decrease in closed cases projected due to loss of staff member/close of project”). If you project significant shifts in service even if overall case numbers have not changed significantly, please also explain (ex. “growth from zero to 20 document preparation cases due to introduction of estate project”).
PBRC is projecting case reductions across all service categories due to uncertainty from COVID-19, the possibility of reduced court operations, potential loss of funding for case activities in our Home Preservation Project, and decreased client interest in remote services compared to in-person clinics. Although we expect to handle a significant number of district court cases for consumers and tenants, it is unclear if other closures will happen or how long modified, small dockets will continue, both of which can dramatically reduce the number of cases we handle. It also remains unclear when we will return to Baltimore Immigration Court, so we may be forced to continue immigration clinics remotely (which results in lower client participation) well into FY22. Finally, unless significant supplemental funding is secured, we may be unable to resume our – prior to COVID-19 – high volume of estate planning activities (documentation preparation cases) beyond September 2021.

Impacts of Other Client Services (500 words)
Describe the impacts of other client services (ex. legal education or pro se training) that you expect to result from this grant. Provide narrative examples. Do not include estimated cases reported in the previous table.
Examples:
"Approximately 500 people will learn how to avoid unnecessary consumer problems through workshops at senior centers."
"1,000 immigrants will be informed about the impacts of new ICE procedures through Know Your Rights presentations at community centers."
• A pool of 600+ attorneys trained in consumer protection, tax sale, Special Immigrant Juvenile Status and
asylum, veterans’ benefits, criminal records expungements, tenant advocacy, estate planning and other
substantive legal areas will be available for pro bono representation.
• Over 100 staff members at MLSC funded legal services programs will be better versed in a number of
substantive legal areas; and over 250 staff will also gain from substantive training and networking at the Partners for Justice Conference.
• Immigration legal services providers will be better able to strategize and communicate through PBRC's
leadership in coordinating responses to current immigration-related legal issues, gaps and services.
• Pro bono programs will have the benefit of streamlined triage for certain cases (e.g. tax sale, utility bills, consumer, etc.) as well as improved protocols, policies and practices for more effective operations.
• Staff from legal services providers will have the opportunity to meet five times a year through the Pro Bono Coordinating Council to network, share best practices, and benefit from presentations and featured topics.
• Local bar associations and committees will have a better understanding of the pro bono needs and
opportunities in their jurisdictions, and will have their pro bono efforts publicized during National
Celebration of Pro Bono Month.
• More than 250 individuals seeking legal advice will benefit from the Marylandfreelegalanswers.org
interactive website at no cost due to pro bono legal counsel orchestrated by PBRC.
• Approximately 2,500 additional distressed homeowners facing tax sale will learn of their legal rights and
options through Tax Sale Resource Guides, community presentations, and use of the PBRC online tax sale
tool, taxsalehelpbaltimore.org.
• Hundreds of members of the public and legal services staff will benefit from local legal services
directories and use of the online Guide to Legal Services in Maryland.
• Over 1,500 individuals will be assisted by phone or email with information and referrals to legal resources.

Long-Term Impacts and Opportunities
What impacts will remain after this grant is over? What impacts do you expect the activities funded under this grant to have on basic opportunities available to low‐income people in Maryland? (500 words)
PBRC’s work impacts opportunities for low-income people in Maryland through two distinct avenues: building capacity in the legal system and inspiring systemic change. Our core services of recruiting, training, referring, and mentoring volunteers increase the attorneys available to assist low-income individuals, whether through our own projects or those of our partners. Training in areas of law important to low-income clients equips lawyers to expand their practice to address areas of need. Each trainee also makes a commitment to pro bono work. For some, the experience will propel them into a long-standing dedication to pro bono service. With the Pro Bono Practice Rule implementation and use of limited scope rules, more attorneys will engage in limited scope service. With the aging population, bringing in younger lawyers to pro bono service models is critical.

PBRC also facilitates training for staff lawyers and pro bono managers, enabling them to expand their practice areas for clients and improve their screening process. PBRC helps build capacity through Best Practices sessions, on-site consultations, and technical assistance, all of which improve provider efficiency and sustainability. These activities enhance cooperation within the legal services community, encourage innovation, and improve client access. From the Pro Bono Coordinating Council to the Partners for Justice Conference and more, PBRC facilitates discussion of legal needs, service gaps, and strategies to address them. By taking the lead with online and limited scope services, PBRC's project models triage and direct prospective clients to appropriate legal resources more efficiently.

By virtue of PBRC’s consistent presence in our direct service work, we provoke systemic change resulting in increased access to justice. Our Consumer Protection Project, for example, was formed in response to the actions of unscrupulous debt buyers and predatory lenders, as well as the complex and expedited court process of that docket. By building relationships with the judges and opposing counsel, PBRC has dramatically improved outcomes for clients. Indeed, we have slowly but surely witnessed an across-the-board reduction in abusive and predatory practices since the Project began in 2011. Today, we almost never see the flagrant abuses that colored nearly all cases in the Project in its initial years. PBRC’s foreclosure work has similarly seen a drastic reduction in predatory practices, reflecting our ongoing presence dealing with these issues. We anticipate that similar long-term impacts will materialize in more recent areas of emergent legal need. PBRC’s utility bill clinics, for example, give our staff and volunteers an opportunity to expose and work to change billing practices and appeal processes. In our Maryland Immigrant Legal Assistance Project, the federal immigration judges—and even court staff—view PBRC as a critical resource for litigants. They relay important information that helps us anticipate client needs and coordinate efforts across all immigration service providers. Our presence in Rent Court may one day lead to similar results for tenants. Beyond the direct service PBRC provides to clients, our projects result in more efficient and effective avenues for low-income people in Maryland to assert their rights and access justice.

Additional Comments (500 words)
Use this space to make any additional comments that will help us evaluate your proposal.
PBRC continues to evolve new and compelling programming, volunteer recruitment, and technical support for MLSC grantees; MLSC support for our work ultimately assists all MLSC grantees. Recent examples of this critical assistance include:

We have moved the Pro Bono Coordinating Council to a fully remote model. In FY21, we have held (or planned) sessions on: Six months into COVID:  In-depth program update & Discussion; Outreach During a Pandemic (to volunteers and potential clients); Bringing balance to life, while working from … wherever!; and Ethics training and discussion for pro bono coordinators. PBRC also invites all staff of legal services partners to attend its Litigation Skills trainings.  For FY21, these include: Practical Protections For Remote Clients: Coercion, Confidentiality And Competence; Top 10 Tips For Pro Bono Practice In District Court; Expert Testimony On A Shoestring; And Basics Of Taking And Defending A Deposition.

Shortly after the start of the pandemic, PBRC published what is now “Ways you can help during the COVID-19 emergency” at https://probonomd.org/remote-service/ to point volunteers to the updated opportunities still available through statewide legal services providers.

Building on lessons learned from last year, PBRC’s Professional Skills Academy currently has 14 Fellows, each of whom is paired with a mentor. Due to the challenges of connecting with clients this year, we have expanded the service portion of the program to include options beyond PBRC’s own projects, such as the Maryland Center for Legal Assistance and Mid-Shore Pro Bono.

When the 2020 Partners for Justice Conference could not be held in person due to the pandemic, PBRC worked with two of the panels to produce recorded sessions that were made available to the public. For 2021, PBRC is presenting the Partners for Justice Conference in a fully remote format for the first time.  This will include 15 panels, stretched over an entire week, as well as a variety of keynote and Q/A sessions to enhance collaboration and build knowledge even when we cannot meet in person.

In October 2020, PBRC presented Demystifying Pro Bono, in partnership with the MSBA Young Lawyers Section, as a statewide training on getting involved with pro bono service.

PBRC relies heavily on MLSC support because it is the only funder that appreciates the overall support and leadership role we play in the entire legal services delivery system. As a true statewide program, we are continuously responding to emerging legal needs and identifying new ways to support both volunteers and legal services partners. The number of people we serve is truly impressive given our range of services and activities.
